237-[LX]-Lab - Managing File Permissions

Overview

This lab focuses on managing file and folder permissions in an Amazon Linux EC2 instance using SSH. It covers changing ownership and permissions for a company folder structure, using both symbolic and absolute modes with the chmod command.

Objectives





Change folder and file permissions to match the appropriate group structure.



Modify file permissions for a user.



Update the company folder structure.

Duration

Approximately 35 minutes.

AWS Service Restrictions

Access is restricted to specific AWS services and actions required for this lab. Attempting to access other services or perform unauthorized actions may result in errors.

Prerequisites





Familiarity with SSH and basic Linux commands.



Access to the AWS Management Console and an Amazon Linux EC2 instance.



PuTTY (for Windows users) or an SSH utility (for macOS/Linux users).

Lab Instructions

Task 1: Use SSH to Connect to an Amazon Linux EC2 Instance

In this task, you connect to an Amazon Linux EC2 instance using an SSH utility.

Steps for Windows Users





Start the lab by selecting Start Lab at the top of the instructions.





Wait for the lab status: ready message, then close the Start Lab panel.



Select AWS to open the AWS Management Console in a new browser tab.





If the tab doesn't open, allow pop-ups in your browser settings.



Arrange the AWS Management Console tab alongside the instructions for easy reference.



From the Details drop-down menu, select Show to view credentials.



Download the labsuser.ppk file and note the PublicIP address.



Open PuTTY and configure the session using the labsuser.ppk file and the PublicIP address (refer to AWS documentation for details).



Connect to the EC2 instance via SSH.

Steps for macOS/Linux Users





Use the terminal to SSH into the EC2 instance with the provided credentials and PublicIP address.

Task 2: Change File and Folder Ownership

This task involves updating the ownership of specific folders within the /home/ec2-user/companyA directory.

Steps





Verify you are in the correct directory:

pwd

If not in /home/ec2-user/companyA, navigate to it:

cd /home/ec2-user/companyA



Change ownership of the companyA folder to user mjackson and group Personnel:

sudo chown -R mjackson:Personnel /home/ec2-user/companyA



Change ownership of the HR folder to user ljuan and group HR:

sudo chown -R ljuan:HR HR



Change ownership of the HR/Finance folder to user major and group Finance:

sudo chown -R major:Finance HR/Finance



Validate the ownership changes:

ls -laR

This displays the ownership permissions for the entire companyA folder structure, including Documents, Employees, HR, Management, Roster.csv, Sales, SharedFalders, and Shipping.

Task 3: Change Permission Modes

This task involves creating files and modifying their permissions using the chmod command in both symbolic and absolute modes.

Steps





Verify you are in the /home/ec2-user/companyA directory:

pwd



Create a file named symbolic_mode_file using vim:

sudo vi symbolic_mode_file





Press ESC, then type :wq and press Enter to save and exit.



Change permissions of symbolic_mode_file to grant group write access using symbolic mode:

sudo chmod g+w symbolic_mode_file



Create a file named absolute_mode_file using vim:

sudo vi absolute_mode_file





Press ESC, then type :wq and press Enter to save and exit.



Change permissions of absolute_mode_file to 764 (owner: read/write/execute, group: read/write, others: read) using absolute mode:

sudo chmod 764 absolute_mode_file



Verify the permissions for both files:

ls -l

Task 4: Assign Permissions

This task involves updating ownership for the Shipping and Sales folders.

Steps





Verify you are in the /home/ec2-user/companyA directory:

pwd



Change ownership of the Shipping folder to user eowusu and group Shipping:

sudo chown -R eowusu:Shipping Shipping



Change ownership of the Sales folder to user rwolf and group Sales:

sudo chown -R rwolf:Sales Sales



Validate the changes:





For the Shipping folder:

ls -laR Shipping



For the Sales folder:

ls -laR Sales

Lab Completion





Select End Lab at the top of the instructions and confirm by selecting Yes.



Wait for the "DELETE has been initiated" message, then close the panel.

Notes





The lab assumes prior knowledge from related courseware.



The ls -laR command recursively lists permissions, confirming changes to the folder structure.



The chmod command supports both symbolic (e.g., g+w) and absolute (e.g., 764) modes for permission changes.
